docs/pages/Parliament-Motions.md, before:

---
title: Parliament Motions
layout: default
navigation_weight: 9
---
- TOC
{:toc}

# Motions and Cat Birds

**Rule**. Normally, in a Parliamentarian system of governance, a *motion* is first declared, then discussed.

But, to make a motion, a member must first be recognized by the chair, or the presiding officer designated for the meeting.

Therefore, the first order of business for any formal meeting is to recognize who will be in the cat-bird seat.

## I move that

When a member is recognized by the chair, he or she first states "I move that ...", then follows up with exactly the crux of the motion.

## I second that

After the member has stated his or her motion, the chair then asks "Do we have a second?"

It is not required that a member who seconds a motion actually like the motion 100%, just that the person who seconds a motion desires a discussion on the motion.

The member who seconds a motion may wait for the chair to ask, or may simply come forward when the mover is complete and simply state "I second that!"

## Worthy of Discussion

After a motion is presented by a member who has been recognized by the chair, and that motion has been seconded by another member other than the maker of the motion, then the chair will recite back to the assembly the question at hand.

## It is moved and seconded

The chair then puts into words for the benefit of the assembly, the motion recited by the initiating member.

A scribe or secretary then places the chair's words, not the words of the original initiating member, into the record.

## Precedence

**Rule**. While the main motion is being considered, a motion to amend the main motion may be entered by a member upon recognition by the chair.

## Refer that

**Rule**. While the main motion is being considered, and a motion to amend the main motion has been entered, the original motion and its amendments, if any, may be referred to a committee by a 3rd motion.

## Adjourn

**Rule**. A motion to adjourn the meeting has top priority, and may be seconded and voted upon without a debate. As long as a majority of the members of the assembly (51%) accept the motion as 'Yea', the meeting is then adjourned.

## Postpone Indefinitely

If the motion proposed and seconded is a sensitive issue to the point members are NOT ready to vote FOR the passage of the motion, then a motion to postpone the vote indefinitely may be made by a member recognized by the chair.

## Postpone To A Certain Time

If the motion proposed and seconded is a sensitive issue to the point members are NOT ready to vote FOR the passage of the motion, then a motion to postpone the vote "To A Certain Time" may be made by a member recognized by the chair.

## Motion To Limit Debate

Debate upon an issue normally allots a period of (10) minutes to each member to address the assembly over a total of two times. That does NOT give the member double time, but merely limits the member to a total of two times during the 50/10 hour of debate.

**Rule**. To limit a debate upon an issue that has been motioned and seconded in any other way requires a 2/3rds majority of the assembly members, NOT a simple majority.

## Close Debate

**Rule**. A vote must always be taken by the assembly to close debate on any issue.

## Gen. Henry M Robert

Shall the decision of the chair stand as the judgment of the assembly?

Yes. But a motion to appeal the decision of the chair may be made by any member.

## How to Calculate a 2/3rds Vote

First, tab the population of the assembly.

Ok ... There are 100 members of the assembly eligible to vote.

Second, count the number of 'Nay' votes against the subject motion.

Ok ... The number of 'Nay' votes is equal to 40.

Now, go ahead and double the number of 'Nay' votes.

Ok ... Double the number of 'Nay' votes equals 80.

**Rule**. If the number of 'Nay' votes doubled exceeds the number of 'Yea' votes ( In this case 80 does exceed 40 ), then the motion failed to muster the necessary 2/3rds vote, and the motion, therefore, fails to carry.

***

**Source**: [The Complete Idiot's Guide to Parliamentary Procedure: Fast Track by Jim Slaughter](https://medmj.us/HowToParliament){:target="_blank"}

Commit message:

Update sources and uses to md
Update style scss and others

docs/pages/Parliament-Motions.md, after:

---
title: Parliament Motions
layout: default
navigation_weight: 9
---
# Parliament Motions

Normally, in a Parliamentarian system of governance, a *motion* is first declared, then discussed.

{% include toc-flammarion.md %}

## Motions and Cat Birds

**Rule**. To make a motion, a member must first be recognized by the chair, or the presiding officer designated for the meeting.

Therefore, the first order of business for any formal meeting is to recognize who will be in the cat-bird seat.

### I move that

When a member is recognized by the chair, he or she first states "I move that ...", then follows up with exactly the crux of the motion.

### I second that

After the member has stated his or her motion, the chair then asks "Do we have a second?"

It is not required that a member who seconds a motion actually like the motion 100%, just that the person who seconds a motion desires a discussion on the motion.

The member who seconds a motion may wait for the chair to ask, or may simply come forward when the mover is complete and simply state "I second that!"

## Worthy of Discussion

After a motion is presented by a member who has been recognized by the chair, and that motion has been seconded by another member other than the maker of the motion, then the chair will recite back to the assembly the question at hand.

### It is moved and seconded

The chair then puts into words for the benefit of the assembly, the motion recited by the initiating member.

A scribe or secretary then places the chair's words, not the words of the original initiating member, into the record.

## Precedence

**Rule**. While the main motion is being considered, a motion to amend the main motion may be entered by a member upon recognition by the chair.

### Refer that

**Rule**. While the main motion is being considered, and a motion to amend the main motion has been entered, the original motion and its amendments, if any, may be referred to a committee by a 3rd motion.

## Adjourn

**Rule**. A motion to adjourn the meeting has top priority, and may be seconded and voted upon without a debate. As long as a majority of the members of the assembly (51%) accept the motion as 'Yea', the meeting is then adjourned.

### Postpone Indefinitely

If the motion proposed and seconded is a sensitive issue to the point members are NOT ready to vote FOR the passage of the motion, then a motion to postpone the vote indefinitely may be made by a member recognized by the chair.

### Postpone To A Certain Time

If the motion proposed and seconded is a sensitive issue to the point members are NOT ready to vote FOR the passage of the motion, then a motion to postpone the vote "To A Certain Time" may be made by a member recognized by the chair.

## Motion To Limit Debate

Debate upon an issue normally allots a period of (10) minutes to each member to address the assembly over a total of two times. That does NOT give the member double time, but merely limits the member to a total of two times during the 50/10 hour of debate.

**Rule**. To limit a debate upon an issue that has been motioned and seconded in any other way requires a 2/3rds majority of the assembly members, NOT a simple majority.

### Close Debate

**Rule**. A vote must always be taken by the assembly to close debate on any issue.

## Gen. Henry M Robert

Shall the decision of the chair stand as the judgment of the assembly?

Yes. But a motion to appeal the decision of the chair may be made by any member.

### How to Calculate a 2/3rds Vote

First, tab the population of the assembly.

Ok ... There are 100 members of the assembly eligible to vote.

Second, count the number of 'Nay' votes against the subject motion.

Ok ... The number of 'Nay' votes is equal to 40.

Now, go ahead and double the number of 'Nay' votes.

Ok ... Double the number of 'Nay' votes equals 80.

**Rule**. If the number of 'Nay' votes doubled exceeds the number of 'Yea' votes ( In this case 80 does exceed 40 ), then the motion failed to muster the necessary 2/3rds vote, and the motion, therefore, fails to carry.

{% include sources-and-uses.md %}

### External Sources

- The [Project Source Links](https://mminail.github.io/Governance/Source-Goverance-Links.htm){:title="Click to Visit the Source Links page of the Governance Lessons Project at GitHub pages"}{:target="_blank"}. Published by © 2017 [Mminail.github.io](https://mminail.github.io/){:title="Click to Visit the Concept Library of the Medical Marijuana Initiative of North America - International Limited, an Arizona Benefit Corporation"}{:target="_blank"}.

- [The Complete Idiot's Guide to Parliamentary Procedure: Fast Track by Jim Slaughter](https://medmj.us/HowToParliament){:title="Click to Visit ..."}{:target="_blank"}
